Paper draft (#205)
JuliaSmoothOptimizers/RegularizedOptimization.jl: paper/paper.md

This is crucial for large-scale problems where exact subproblem solutions are prohibitive.

## Support for Hessians as Linear Operators

The second-order methods in **RegularizedOptimization.jl** can use Hessian approximations represented as linear operators via [LinearOperators.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/LinearOperators.jl).
Explicitly forming Hessians as dense or sparse matrices is often prohibitively expensive, both computationally and in terms of memory, especially in high-dimensional settings.
In contrast, many problems admit efficient implementations of Hessian–vector or Jacobian–vector products, either through automatic differentiation tools or limited-memory quasi-Newton updates, making the linear-operator approach more scalable and practical.

## In-place methods

All solvers in **RegularizedOptimization.jl** are implemented in an in-place fashion, minimizing memory allocations and improving performance.
This is particularly important for large-scale problems where memory usage can be a bottleneck.

> # Examples

Author: It takes a lot of time to precompile and its not a large scale only 5 times 5, but I might add it with the trust-region algorithm.

The library provides a modular and extensible framework for experimenting some nonsmooth nonconvex optimization algorithms, including:

- **Trust-region methods (TR, TRDH)** [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022] and [@leconte-orban-2023],
- **Quadratic regularization methods (R2, R2N)** [@diouane-habiboullah-orban-2024] and [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022],
- **Levenbergh-Marquardt methods (LM, LMTR)** [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2024].

These methods rely solely on the gradient and Hessian(-vector) information of the smooth part $f$ and the proximal mapping of the nonsmooth part $h$ in order to compute steps.
Then, the objective function $f + h$ is used only to accept or reject trial points.
Moreover, they can handle cases where Hessian approximations are unbounded[@diouane-habiboullah-orban-2024] and [@leconte-orban-2023-2], making the package particularly suited for large-scale, ill-conditioned, and nonsmooth problems.

# Statement of need

## Unified framework for nonsmooth methods

There exists a way to solve \eqref{eq:nlp} in Julia via [ProximalAlgorithms.jl](https://github.com/JuliaFirstOrder/ProximalAlgorithms.jl).
It implements several proximal algorithms for nonsmooth optimization.

> However, the available examples only consider convex instances of $h$, namely the $\ell_1$ norm and there are no tests for memory allocations.

Reviewer: Nonconvex h is allowed. It doesn't matter what the examples are.

Moreover, it implements only one quasi-Newton method (L-BFGS) and does not support other Hessian approximations.

> **RegularizedOptimization.jl**, in contrast, implements a broad class of regularization-based algorithms for solving problems of the form $f(x) + h(x)$, where $f$ is smooth and $h$ is nonsmooth.

Reviewer: Please give an accurate comparison between the two packages.

Specifically, **RegularizedOptimization.jl** interoperates with:

- **Definition of smooth problems $f$** via [NLPModels.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/NLPModels.jl) [@orban-siqueira-nlpmodels-2020] which provides a standardized Julia API for representing nonlinear programming (NLP) problems.
Large collections of such problems are available in [Cutest.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/CUTEst.jl) [@orban-siqueira-cutest-2020] and [OptimizationProblems.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/OptimizationProblems.jl) [@migot-orban-siqueira-optimizationproblems-2023].
Another option is to use [RegularizedProblems.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/RegularizedProblems.jl), which provides instances commonly used in the nonsmooth optimization literature.
- **Hessian approximations (quasi-Newton, diagonal approximations)** via [LinearOperators.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/LinearOperators.jl), which represents Hessians as linear operators and implements efficient Hessian–vector products.

> - **Definition of nonsmooth terms $h$** via [ProximalOperators.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/ProximalOperators.jl), which offers a large collection of nonsmooth functions, and [ShiftedProximalOperators.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/ShiftedProximalOperators.jl), which provides shifted proximal mappings for nonsmooth functions.

Reviewer: What is this list? It doesn't belong to any sentence.

Author: I will use sentences instead

This modularity makes it easy to benchmark existing solvers available in the repository [@diouane-habiboullah-orban-2024], [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022], [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2024], and [@leconte-orban-2023-2].

## Support for inexact subproblem solves

> Solvers in **RegularizedOptimization.jl** allow inexact resolution of trust-region and cubic-regularized subproblems using first-order that are implemented in the package itself such as the quadratic regularization method R2[@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022] and R2DH[@diouane-habiboullah-orban-2024] with trust-region variants TRDH[@leconte-orban-2023-2]

Reviewer: where do we solve cubic subproblems?

This is crucial for large-scale problems where exact subproblem solutions are prohibitive.

## Support for Hessians as Linear Operators

The second-order methods in **RegularizedOptimization.jl** can use Hessian approximations represented as linear operators via [LinearOperators.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/LinearOperators.jl).
Explicitly forming Hessians as dense or sparse matrices is often prohibitively expensive, both computationally and in terms of memory, especially in high-dimensional settings.
In contrast, many problems admit efficient implementations of Hessian–vector or Jacobian–vector products, either through automatic differentiation tools or limited-memory quasi-Newton updates, making the linear-operator approach more scalable and practical.

## In-place methods

All solvers in **RegularizedOptimization.jl** are implemented in an in-place fashion, minimizing memory allocations and improving performance.
This is particularly important for large-scale problems, where memory usage can become a bottleneck.

> Even in low-dimensional settings, Julia may exhibit significantly slower performance due to extra allocations, making the in-place design a key feature of the package.

Reviewer: ?????

# Examples

A simple example is the solution of a regularized quadratic problem with an $\ell_1$ penalty, as described in [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022].
Such problems are common in statistical learning and compressed sensing applications.The formulation is
$$
  \min_{x \in \mathbb{R}^n} \ \tfrac{1}{2}\|Ax-b\|_2^2+\lambda\|x\|_0,
$$
where $A \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times n}$, $b \in \mathbb{R}^m$, and $\lambda>0$ is a regularization parameter.

```julia
using LinearAlgebra, Random
using ProximalOperators
using NLPModels, NLPModelsModifiers, RegularizedProblems, RegularizedOptimization, SolverCore

# Set random seed for reproducibility
Random.seed!(1234)   

# Define a basis pursuit denoising problem
compound = 10

> bpdn_model, _, _ = bpdn_model(compound)

Reviewer: Not a very useful example. It's a linear least squares. At least choose something nonconvex.

Author: Ok I will choose SVM instead.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:nlp}
    \underset{x \in \mathbb{R}^n}{\text{minimize}} \quad f(x) + h(x),
\end{equation}
where $f: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$ is continuously differentiable on $\mathbb{R}^n$, and $h: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R} \cup \{+\infty\}$ is lower semi-continuous.
Both $f$ and $h$ may be nonconvex.

The library provides a modular and extensible framework for experimenting some nonsmooth nonconvex optimization algorithms, including:

- **Trust-region methods (TR, TRDH)** [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022] and [@leconte-orban-2023],
- **Quadratic regularization methods (R2, R2N)** [@diouane-habiboullah-orban-2024] and [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022],
- **Levenbergh-Marquardt methods (LM, LMTR)** [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2024].

These methods rely solely on the gradient and Hessian(-vector) information of the smooth part $f$ and the proximal mapping of the nonsmooth part $h$ in order to compute steps.
Then, the objective function $f + h$ is used only to accept or reject trial points.

> Moreover, they can handle cases where Hessian approximations are unbounded[@diouane-habiboullah-orban-2024] and [@leconte-orban-2023-2], making the package particularly suited for large-scale, ill-conditioned, and nonsmooth problems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, they can handle cases where Hessian approximations are unbounded [@diouane-habiboullah-orban-2024] and [@leconte-orban-2023-2], making the package particularly suited for large-scale, ill-conditioned, and nonsmooth problems.
```

# Statement of need

## Model-based framework for nonsmooth methods

> There exists a way to solve \eqref{eq:nlp} in Julia using [ProximalAlgorithms.jl](https://github.com/JuliaFirstOrder/ProximalAlgorithms.jl), which implements in-place first-order line search–based methods for composite optimization.

Reviewer 2: `composite` has not been defined

is that those implemented here involve a translation of the nonsmooth term.
Specifically, this package considers proximal operators defined as
$$
    argmin \, { \tfrac{1}{2} ‖t - q‖₂² + ν h(x + s + t) + χ(s + t; ΔB) | t ∈ ℝⁿ },
$$
where q is given, x and s are fixed shifts, h is the nonsmooth term with respect
to which we are computing the proximal operator, and χ(.; ΔB) is the indicator of
a ball of radius Δ defined by a certain norm.

## Testing and documentation

The package includes a comprehensive suite of unit tests that cover all functionalities, ensuring reliability and correctness.
Extensive documentation is provided, including a user guide, API reference, and examples to help users get started quickly.
Aqua.jl is used to test the package dependencies.
Documentation is built using Documenter.jl.

## Hyperparameter tuning

The solvers in **RegularizedOptimization.jl** do not require extensive hyperparameter tuning.

## Non-monotone strategies

The solvers in **RegularizedOptimization.jl** implement non-monotone strategies to accept trial points, which can enhance convergence properties.

## Application studies

> The package can be applied to the exact penality work by [@diouane-gollier-orban-2024] that addresses a problem where the model of the nonsmooth part is different from the function $h$.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The package is used in the exact penalty work of [@diouane-gollier-orban-2024] to solve a problem where the model of the nonsmooth part differs from the function $h$.
```

```julia
using LinearAlgebra
using ProximalOperators
using NLPModels, NLPModelsModifiers, RegularizedProblems, RegularizedOptimization
using DifferentialEquations, ADNLPModels

# Define the Fitzhugh-Nagumo problem
model, _, _ = RegularizedProblems.fh_model()

# Define the Hessian approximation
f = LBFGSModel(fh_model)

# Define the nonsmooth regularizer (L1 norm)
λ = 0.1
h = NormL1(λ)

# Define the regularized NLP model
reg_nlp = RegularizedNLPModel(f, h)

# Choose a solver (TR) and execution statistics tracker
solver_tr = TRSolver(reg_nlp)
stats = RegularizedExecutionStats(reg_nlp)

# Solve the problem
solve!(solver_tr, reg_nlp, stats, x = f.meta.x0, atol = 1e-3, rtol = 1e-4, verbose = 10, ν = 1.0e+2)
```

````
=== Comparaison PANOC vs TR (FH_smooth_term) ===
PANOC :
  itérations         = 81
  # f évaluations    = 188
  # ∇f évaluations   = 188
  # prox appels (g)  = 107
  solution (≈)       = [-0.0, 0.19071674721048656, 1.037084478194805, -0.0, -0.0]

TR :
  statut             = first_order
  # f évaluations    = 65
  # ∇f évaluations   = 52
  solution (≈)       = [0.0, 0.1910326406395867, 1.0357773976471938, 0.0, 0.0]
  ````

# Acknowledgements

> Mohamed Laghdaf Habiboullah is supported by an excellence FRQNT grant,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mohamed Laghdaf Habiboullah is supported by an excellence FRQNT grant.
```

> and Youssef Diouane and Dominique Orban are partially supported by an NSERC Discovery Grant.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Youssef Diouane and Dominique Orban are partially supported by an NSERC Discovery Grant.
```

  \setmonofont[Path = ./, Scale=0.68]{JuliaMono-Regular.ttf}
---

# Summary

[RegularizedOptimization.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/RegularizedOptimization.jl) is a Julia [@bezanson-edelman-karpinski-shah-2017] package that implements a family of quadratic regularization and trust-region type algorithms for solving nonsmooth optimization problems of the form:
\begin{equation}\label{eq:nlp}
    \underset{x \in \mathbb{R}^n}{\text{minimize}} \quad f(x) + h(x),
\end{equation}
where $f: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$ is continuously differentiable on $\mathbb{R}^n$, and $h: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R} \cup \{+\infty\}$ is lower semi-continuous.
Both $f$ and $h$ may be nonconvex.

The library provides a modular and extensible framework for experimenting with nonsmooth and nonconvex optimization algorithms, including:

- **Trust-region methods (TR, TRDH)** [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022] and [@leconte-orban-2023],
- **Quadratic regularization methods (R2, R2N)** [@diouane-habiboullah-orban-2024] and [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022],
- **Levenberg-Marquardt methods (LM, LMTR)** [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2024].

> - **Trust-region methods (TR, TRDH)** [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022;@leconte-orban-2023],
> - **Quadratic regularization methods (R2, R2N)** [@diouane-habiboullah-orban-2024;@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022],
> - **Levenbergh-Marquardt methods (LM, LMTR)** [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2024].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The main difference between the proximal operators implemented in
[ProximalOperators.jl](https://github.com/JuliaFirstOrder/ProximalOperators.jl)
is that those implemented here involve a translation of the nonsmooth term.
Specifically, this package considers proximal operators defined as
$$
    argmin \, { \tfrac{1}{2} ‖t - q‖₂² + ν h(x + s + t) + χ(s + t; ΔB) | t ∈ ℝⁿ },
$$
where q is given, x and s are fixed shifts, h is the nonsmooth term with respect
to which we are computing the proximal operator, and χ(.; ΔB) is the indicator of
a ball of radius Δ defined by a certain norm.

![Composition of JSO packages](jso-packages.pdf){ width=70% }

## Testing and documentation

The package includes a comprehensive suite of unit tests that cover all functionalities, ensuring reliability and correctness.
Extensive documentation is provided, including a user guide, API reference, and examples to help users get started quickly.
Aqua.jl is used to test the package dependencies.
Documentation is built using Documenter.jl.

## Hyperparameter tuning

> The solvers in **RegularizedOptimization.jl** do not require extensive hyperparameter tuning.

Author: I removed it

  \setmonofont[Path = ./, Scale=0.68]{JuliaMono-Regular.ttf}
---

# Summary

[RegularizedOptimization.jl](https://github.com/JuliaSmoothOptimizers/RegularizedOptimization.jl) is a Julia [@bezanson-edelman-karpinski-shah-2017] package that implements a family of quadratic regularization and trust-region type algorithms for solving nonsmooth optimization problems of the form:
\begin{equation}\label{eq:nlp}
    \underset{x \in \mathbb{R}^n}{\text{minimize}} \quad f(x) + h(x),
\end{equation}
where $f: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$ is continuously differentiable on $\mathbb{R}^n$, and $h: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R} \cup \{+\infty\}$ is lower semi-continuous.
Both $f$ and $h$ may be nonconvex.

The library provides a modular and extensible framework for experimenting with nonsmooth and nonconvex optimization algorithms, including:

- **Trust-region methods (TR, TRDH)** [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022;@leconte-orban-2023],
- **Quadratic regularization methods (R2, R2N)** [@diouane-habiboullah-orban-2024;@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2022],
- **Levenbergh-Marquardt methods (LM, LMTR)** [@aravkin-baraldi-orban-2024].

> - **Augmented Lagrangian methods (ALTR)** (cite?).

Author: I will add it.
